welcome to topcast and to the second
part of my discussion of chapter nine of
the fabric of reality quantum computers
last episode I indicated that this would
be a two-part process of getting through
this chapter but I've had to revise
things last chapter I spent rather long
on Exposition and very little time on
reading and I think something similar is
going to happen this time so it's going
to be at least three parts in order to
get through this chapter in its entirety
and as I said there this chapter more
than any other in the fabric of reality
could itself be turned into an entire
book given the spectrum of topics that
it covers all the way from the
differences between quantum theory and
classical physics what quantum computers
are as opposed to classical computers
the nature of mathematics the history of
computation itself all the way through
to things like chaos theory and whether
or not Chaos Theory really obtains in
the real world and we're going to be
dealing with that in short order so
rather than a long intro here let me get
straight into the readings this section
of the book begins with David writing
and I quote in 1982 the physicist
Richard Feynman considered the computer
simulation of quantum mechanical objects
his starting point was something that
had already been known for some time
without its significance being
appreciated namely that predicting the
behavior of quantum mechanical systems
or as we can describe it rendering
quantum mechanical environments and
virtual reality is in general an
intractable task end quote so here we
have David giving credit to Richard
Feynman there is some debate of course
about the history of quantum computation
and who is most responsible and so on
and so forth for the field developing
the field of course it is always a group
of people that come together but there
are giants that stand out in the same
way as we talk about classical
computation as being Babbage and
Lovelace and Turing and church and
different people contributed different
aspects of the solution to the problem
of how to go about constructing these
real world things many of us seem to
converge on the idea that it was Turing
simply because Turing put down in fine
detail Precision a mathematical
representation of what this device would
be able to do and in fact what the
physical operation of the thing was of
course he didn't understand paper as we
like to say but he had this idea of a
machine a machine which would be able to
do the task of any other machine so he
had the idea of a unit Universal machine
the universal turing machine which is
the precursor of course today the
theoretical precursor to the physical
objects that we have on our desktops
called computers but of course there are
others there there was Babbage early on
who was manufacturing devices and there
was church of course who had his own
approach and so when we get into Quantum
computation and there is some debate
about well was it Feynman who first came
up with the idea was it David Deutsch
who came up with the proof for the
existence of these things and many of us
like to say well in the same way that we
give during most of the credit for
classical computation we give Deutsch
most of the credit for Quantum
computation because hey he wrote the
paper the paper which explained how we
can have the marriage of these two
things computation hitherto thought of
as nothing but an arm of pure
mathematics to a large extent certainly
in the academic realm and quantum theory
unifying these two things to give us the
theory of computation the theory of
computation today is of course Quantum
computation and David will come to that
but that aside that's just an
interesting part of the history of ideas
for those of us who are interested in
that kind of thing I think the books for
the history of quantum computation are
yet to be written but I've seen some
attempts at people writing books about
the history so far and I can't say I
approve
people are either coming down on the
side of well it's all the fools errands
we're never going to have quantum
computers the pessimists idea or
downplaying the contribution of certain
people and I don't know why this happens
but I don't know why popper is
downplayed in the academy either but
these things happen so here but
regardless here we have Feynman talking
about how if you want to try and compute
the behavior of quantum mechanical
objects in other words predict what's
going to happen with them it seems to be
intractable what's an example well take
an atom of some kind or other if you
just have to predict what's going to
happen with the electron in a hydrogen
atom orbiting its single proton well
that seems pretty straightforward after
all there's only two objects there
there's the proton and the electron and
there's only a couple of forces so to
speak the electrostatic force of
attraction between the positive nucleus
and the negative electron and for one to
the another term the Exclusion Principle
or Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
whatever you want to refer to at the
quantum mechanical effect that causes
the thing to not spiral into the nucleus
the electron into the nucleus I should
say so we've got The Balancing Act
between these two forces okay very well
but as soon as you start to do with
something more complicated like the
helium atom well things begin to spiral
out of control into complexity now you
have two electrons and two protons and
you have some neutrons as well now one
of those protons is going to have an
effect on one of the electrons and one
of the electrons going to have an effect
on one of those protons so there you
have something like the hydrogen atom
except that you've got the two electrons
there each going to have an effect to
each one upon the other and they're also
going to have an effect each upon the
two protons that are in the nucleus so
this is already already becoming
exponentially more difficult in terms of
predicting where those electrons are
going to be moment to moment in so far
as you were able to do that at all never
mind when we get to carbon carbons
number six in the periodic table so now
you've got six electrons and not only
are they not at the same distance from
the nucleus because now they are in two
shells if you like that they're in
different energy levels there are
different distances from the nucleus but
having six of them each of them having
an effect one upon the other and upon
all the objects in the nucleus were
rapidly spiraling out of control in
terms of trying to predict what any one
of them is going to do from moment to
moment let alone the entire ensemble and
we're just still talking single atoms
never mind molecules okay so this is the
difficulty that Feynman was envisaging
especially if you're trying to compute
these things using a classical computer
okay so let's go back to the book and
see what David has to say about this he
writes quote one reason why the
significance of this had not been
appreciated is that no one expected the
computer prediction of interesting
physical phenomena to be especially easy
take weather forecasting or earthquake
prediction for instance although the
relevant equations are known the
difficulty of applying them in realistic
situations is notorious this has
recently been brought to public
attention in popular books and articles
on chaos and the butterfly effect these
effects are not responsible for the
intractability that Feynman had in mind
for the simple reason that they occur
only in classical physics that is not in
reality since reality is quantum
mechanical pausing there my reflection
on this this idea that the weather is
difficult to predict it kind of seems to
be an intractable problem everyone knows
this phenomena even recently it was
brought home to me that you know we have
stretches of good weather here in Sydney
and they seem to do a good job of
predicting long stretches of good
weather but then one particular day it
was only a few weeks ago we had a
thunderstorm that no one predicted and
it was quite a severe thunderstorm as
well it just can't seemed to come out of
the Clear Blue Sky the meteorologist did
not predict it there you go but the idea
about earthquakes I remember studying
geophysics and it was back in 2012 and
it just by coincidence as I was studying
this stuff there was an earthquake in
Italy La Aquila and it was a huge
earthquake there now devastating as it
was the one of the more interesting
things to come out of that earthquake
was the seismologists in Italy were
convicted of manslaughter for not
accurately predicting the earthquake you
can look this up 2012 conviction of
seismologists in Italy the government
expected that they should have been able
to predict the earthquake but you know
as we were studying at the time in the
academics at Macquarie University where
I was studying this at the time were
readily able to explain we simply can't
predict earthquakes we don't know how to
do this you know you can have all the
fancy sensors that you'd like connected
to you know plates and so on and so
forth to detect whether or not they're
moving slightly but slight movements
don't indicate that large movements are
about to happen it is very difficult to
tell when you've got huge solid objects
sliding past each other when they stick
and then it's called the stick slip
phenomena when they stick you don't know
exactly when they're going to slip we
can't do this we don't know how to
actually predict when earthquakes are
going to happen so this was a remarkable
event that scientists would actually be
convicted for not doing the thing that
hitherto is impossible for us to do
given our state of knowledge and
Technology there you go don't be a
seismologist in Italy I think is the the
lesson there but here in the chapter we
have the first mention of this so-called
Butterfly Effect or chaos David's going
to go into this so let me let me read
what David has to say about this and
I'll put my own spin on things here if
you like David goes on to say quote
after saying reality is quantum
mechanical but the butterfly effect
itself is a classical phenomena all
right quote nevertheless I want to make
some remarks here about chaotic
classical motions if only to highlight
the quite different characters of
classical and Quantum unpredictability
chaos theory is about limitations on
predictability In classical physics
stemming from the fact that almost all
classical systems are inherently
unstable the instability in question has
nothing to do with any tendency to
behave violently or disintegrate it is
about an extreme sensitivity to initial
conditions suppose we know the present
state of some physical system such as a
set of billiard balls rolling on a table
if the system obeyed classical physics
as it does to a good approximation we
should then be able to determine its
future Behavior say whether a particular
ball will go into a pocket or not from
the relevant Laws of Motion just as we
can predict an eclipse or a planetary
conjunction from the same laws but in
practice we are never able to measure
the initial positions and velocities
perfectly so the question arises if we
know them to some reasonable degree of
accuracy can we also predict to a
reasonable degree of accuracy how they
will behave in the future and the answer
is usually that we cannot pausing near
my reflection okay so first let's deal
with the billiard balls situation and
and and really get a handle on what
David's referring to here if you are
able to write down the equations of
motion for the movement of billiard
balls on a Billiot table which you can
very straightforward classical equations
of motion
then if one billion ball is here and one
Billy ball is here and you're shooting
one billion ball at the other then what
you want to know is precisely where this
billiard ball is and exactly at what
velocity its initial velocity is as it
moves away from where it starts to where
it's going to go all right here's the
problem exactly where is it so that when
you strike it you know precisely where
you're going to hit it well you might
say it's at x equals one centimeter away
from the edge of the billiard ball table
okay well that's to a certain level of
precision perhaps a more precise
measurement if you had a better ruler
would be
1.01 centimeters away from where the
edge of the billiard ball table is but
if you had an even more precise
measuring device maybe lasers and so on
and so forth you'd find that it's
1.010001 centimeters away from the edge
and these differences these very subtle
differences are going to change the
precise angle at which you would want to
hit that if you had some sort of ideal
robot situation where you're going to be
able to program this robot to use a pool
cue to hit the ball exactly at a
particular velocity when you want to hit
it where you want to hit it classically
there is no limit to how precise you'd
want to become and and when you plug
these numbers into the equations and
ever so slight you know one millionth of
a difference between the Precision of
these two values is going to have a big
effect on what actually happens if
you're off by the tiniest tiniest
percentage it's going to have a large
effect classically speaking on where the
billiard ball is going to go and this is
what we mean here which is what David
means here where he says but in practice
we are never able to measure the initial
positions and velocities perfectly
that's both classically and in the
quantum realm classically there is no
smallest amount of anything at all so
you can never get perfect Precision
there's no such thing as perfect
Precision classically you can only ever
get more and more precise asymptotically
approach whatever the real position or
the real quantity is that you're trying
to measure in the quantum realm there is
such a smallest amount but just remember
that in terms of space and time space
and time is governed by General activity
which is a classical Theory so there is
no smallest unit of space and time there
might very well be something called the
Planck time Planck length which people
make a big deal about I've talked about
on top cars before that's more about
what is the smallest unit of time and
space that you can measure that you can
measure but that is a very different
question to what is the smallest unit of
time or what is the smallest interval of
time or the smallest interval of space
that exists and that is governed by
general relativity and as far as I know
General activity says that you can just
continue dividing up space time into its
smaller intervals as you like quantum
theory says that things cannot be so
divided but it is not a theory of
space-time so therefore although it says
that there's a limit to the smallest
unit of space time that you can measure
because our measuring devices have a
have a fundamental limit built into them
because of quantum theory that doesn't
mean that the continuous space and time
that really exists according to general
relativity actually has some sort of
quantum element to it we don't have the
successor Theory to Quantum Theory into
general relativity maybe a quantum
gravity if that thing ever arose will
tell us that there's a smaller student
of quantum a smallest unit of space time
but we're not there yet we don't know
that we have no such theory of that nor
do we even have an expectation that
space-time should be quantized even
though so many particle physics seem to
think that this has to be the case it
doesn't have to be the case there could
be another theory altogether a third
theory that stands apart from quantum
theory from general relativity and it's
just different altogether subsuming both
of them and not quantizing space we
don't know we're in a position where we
don't know but if we're going to take
our best theories now seriously now as
explanations of reality now we have to
insist that there is no smallest unit of
time and there is no smallest unit of
space even if we are limited to exactly
how precise our measurements of these
things can be we cannot measure the
positions and velocities of anything
perfectly as David says there you can
observe yourself the Exquisite
susceptibility to differences in initial
conditions for a approximately classical
system although nothing is classical of
course we know that everything is
quantum except for Gravity if you look
at the thing called the double pendulum
if you never send a double pendulum
before I'll put one up on the screen
a double pendulum is one pendulum
attached to the other while a single
pendulum is perfectly predictable as we
like to say approximately perfectly
predictable the double pendulum if you
change the beginning the starting point
of it then what it does over time is
very different each time you run the
thing each time you run the thing you
get a different trajectory it appears to
demonstrate what is called chaos but
this is not genuine chaos there's no
such thing as genuine chaos for chaos to
be chaos I suppose it would have to be
completely indeterminate you wouldn't be
able to it would be governed by nothing
it would be ungovernable and not
governed by any physical laws but
there's no such thing in this universe
so it displays extremely complex
Behavior but not chaotic Behavior just
to an approximation now what is this
Butterfly Effect what is this thing this
butterfly effect a lot of Popular
Science makes a huge deal about the
butterfly effect as if it's a real thing
it's entered the Zeitgeist you know you
you yourself and your personal life make
one small change and it has this
amplification effect causing big things
to happen in the lives of others or in
yourself at some later Point okay
let's just read what David has to say
about the butterfly effect and I'll have
some Reflections upon this he goes on to
say quote so the question arises if we
know them the initial conditions to some
reasonable degree of accuracy can we
also predict to a reasonable degree of
accuracy how they will behave in the
future they being these systems and the
answer is usually that we cannot the
difference between the real trajectory
and the predicted trajectory calculated
from slightly inaccurate data tends to
grow exponentially and irregularly
chaotically with time so that after a
while the original slightly imperfectly
known state is no guide at all to what
the system is doing the implication for
computer prediction is that planetary
motions the epitome of classical
predictability are untypical classical
systems in order to predict what a
typical classical system will do after
only a moderate period one would have to
determine its initial state to an
impossibly high Precision thus it said
that in principle the flap of a
butterfly's wing in one hemisphere of
the planet could cause a hurricane in
the other hemisphere the infeasibility
of weather forecasting and the like is
then attributed to the impossibility of
accounting for every butterfly on the
planet end quote so there we have it so
classically we would need to have an
impossibly high Precision in terms of
our values that we want to plug into our
equations for the initial conditions of
any attempt to predict what's going to
happen for the evolution of a particular
system over time governed by those
equations of motion we've got to put
some numbers in the numbers can't be
arbitrary they have to be measured our
measuring devices are limited but even
if we had super precise measuring
devices we would need it wouldn't matter
how super precise they are unless they
were infinitely precise there would
always be a difference between what is
measured and what is real you could
measure something the length of
something down to the 15th decimal place
I guess impossible given any real-life
measuring device a 50 decimal place but
in reality the decimal places go on
forever forever and so there's a there's
an infinite difference in Precision
between reality which is infinitely
precise and your measurement of it which
isn't and that difference is although
it's going to be Amplified magnified by
the evolution of the system over time as
time goes on the differences become more
and more pronounced over time and so
therefore your prediction becomes less
and less accurate over time okay so
that's one thing as David goes on to say
and this is really where I want to get
to for the the punch line here he says
quote having just talked about how you
know the butterfly flaps its wings on
one side of the planet and on the other
hemisphere you get a hurricane this
could happen classically I'll get to why
in a moment but it can't happen in the
real world and I'll get to why David
says quote however real hurricanes and
real butterflies obey quantum theory not
classical mechanics the instability that
would rapidly amplify slight
mispecifications of an initial classical
state is simply not a feature of quantum
mechanical systems in quantum mechanics
small deviations from a specified
initial tend to cause only small
deviations from the predicted final
States instead accurate prediction is
made Difficult by quite a different
effect
pausing their my reflection before I get
onto that quite different effect let's
talk about why the butterfly effect
doesn't exist in real life here's why it
doesn't exist classically speaking if
the butterfly flaps its wings here in my
room then as you get further and further
away from the butterfly's Wings the
strength with which the air has been
Disturbed becomes less and less and less
if you're right next to the butterfly
flapping at swingston you can feel the
little flap of the butterfly's wings but
if you're now one meter away maybe you
can barely feel a little of course in
real life you'd never be able to feel it
but let's say you're super sensitive
okay one meter away you can barely feel
it 10 meters away hardly any hope but
classically speaking that just means you
can't feel it it doesn't mean there's
not actually been disturbance of the air
the air will be disturbed by the
butterflies wings no matter how far away
you are from it it's like ripples of
water spreading out from where you drop
a stone in a lake those ripples become
ever ever more faint ever ever smaller
right near where the stone has been
dropped yeah big wave but now that
energy is being spread out over more and
more and more area of the top of the
lake and the wave therefore gets smaller
and smaller and smaller diminishing in
amplitude as we say
so too with the butterflies Wings the
disturbance of the air gets ever smaller
and smaller and smaller Without Limits
without limit that's classically
speaking
but the the real world operates
according to Quantum Theory and there is
in quantum theory a smallest disturbance
possible a smallest amount of energy the
Quantum of energy there's photons
classically speaking light for example
can be turned down ever more dimly and
we've talked about this here in the
fabric of reality in the chapter on
Shadows turn down the dimness of a light
classically speaking and you never get
to a smallest amount of light there is
no such thing as a smallest amount of
light classically speaking there's no
such thing as the smallest amount of
water you don't get to a Quantum of
water but we know now there is a
smallest amount of water it's called the
molecule of water there's a Quantum of
water the smallest amount of water in
the same way there's a smallest amount
of light it's called the photon of light
there's the smallest amount of energy
the photon of energy So classically
speaking although the flap of the
Butterflies Wings never decays to zero
quantum theory says there will come a
point at which you get a smallest
disturbance of the air which will not be
able to disturb any air any further this
this reminds me of a similar analogy we
can talk about this for the phenomena of
a supernova going off somewhere in
another galaxy okay somewhere in another
galaxy now if you're on a planet
orbiting a star that's near to that
Supernova that's having gone off you
better believe that the energy of that
Supernova is going to cause you serious
disturbances the energy of those photons
is going to have physical effects upon
the planet that you're wrong okay
blowing away the atmosphere literally
the photons are so energetic they can
just split apart the molecules of gas in
the air of your atmosphere okay so it's
going to have severe physical
consequences now if if there's a
supernova that goes off in our galaxy on
the other side of our galaxy as has
happened in living memories I think 1987
a that might have been in the magellanic
clouds anyway you can imagine that as
long as the Supernova is far enough away
still within our galaxy it can still
have some minor physical effects maybe
the photons of light are so energetic
that when they strike the atmosphere
here they can ionize some of the
molecules of air ionizing some of those
molecules are there how does this
physically happen well what happens what
physically happens is the photons arrive
here at Earth they crash into they have
physical collisions with the electrons
orbiting the nuclei of the molecules of
air and when they do as those photons
hit those electrons they they bump them
up to another energy level they get the
photon gets absorbed physically bumps
the electron up to a high energy level
it's got now more energy and then that
electron can fall down from the energy
level at the new energy level that it's
got and release another Photon so that's
a physical effect that's a physical
effect that can happen given the energy
of the photon coming in now now I've
talked about this on top cast before
that there are sort of these three
things that can happen in theory if a
photon interacts with an atom and the
three things are one the photon has so
much energy that when it strikes the
atom hitting the electron being absorbed
by the electron it has so much energy it
physically knocks the electron out of
the atom that's called ionizing the atom
so a photon can have that much energy
ionizing radiation so to speak it can
just have so much energy it causes a
real physical effect of removing the
electron from the atom it can have that
lesser effect that I just mentioned now
where it doesn't knock the electron
entirely out of the atom but instead the
photon comes in it gives its energy to
the electron and it causes it to rise up
one two three ten energy levels but it's
still orbiting the nucleus but now it's
got a lot more energy and so it's
orbiting the nucleus at this higher
energy and that's unstable so what it
tends to do is the the electron tends to
fall down it can either fall down in one
gar it could Cascade down one step at a
time and each time it comes down an
energy level it releases photons and so
this produces Photon emission it
produces the emission of photons right
so that could happen but on quantum
theory what can also happen is nothing
at all except the vibration of the atom
that little bit in other words the
photon that comes in can have
insufficient energy to cause the
electron to move up an energy level it
will be absorbed but it causes the
thermal energy of the atom to increase
but otherwise there's no movement of the
electron the electron isn't changed in
place and there's a minimum possible
energy there's a threshold of energy the
Quantum of energy that is required to be
delivered to an electron orbiting a
nucleus in order to cause it to rise up
to the next energy level and if that
minimum threshold is not exceeded there
will be no movement of the electron from
one energy level to the other it just
won't happen and this fundamentally is
why the butterfly effect isn't a real
thing there is a minimum flap of
amount of energy coming from those
butterfly wings which if the threshold
is not exceeded will not cause that air
to continually be disturbed all the way
from one hemisphere to the other we kind
of know this intuitively that this is
what really must go on that disturbances
of air in one place don't actually reach
to another place now classically that
doesn't happen as we say that we can
have movements of air all over the place
that never Decay to zero and can come to
together to amplify each other in a huge
wave of motion which we call a hurricane
of some sort okay in theory that's what
could happen classically but happily our
world doesn't operate classically it
offers operates via Quantum laws of
physics where things can Decay to a
minimum amount a minimum amount
classically they do not Decay to a
minimum amount ever and so therefore
they can be carried as influences these
effects can be carried from one side of
the planet to the other and hence you've
got this thing called Chaos Theory or
the butterfly effect so that's one
aspect of the butterfly effect the other
aspect of the butterfly effect closely
related is this idea that if the
butterfly flaps its wings maybe nothing
happens classically speaking on the
other side of the world or maybe it
causes a hurricane these are two huge
differences in the state of the world at
the end the end product the final
outcome given the initial conditions
okay the butterfly slightly moves its
wings in this direction rather than that
direction hurricane or not okay okay
that means that classically speaking
it's impossible to predict certain
classical systems the evolution of
certain classical systems just as it's
so difficult to predict what's going to
happen with the double pendulum you
can't measure precisely the starting
point of the double pendulum which is
what you need to do you need to measure
it exquisitely precisely in order to
predict what the trajectory will be from
moment to moment you can't do that and
so therefore the final outcome what the
trajectory is going to be is unknown to
you even if you have the initial
conditions to some approximation and a
perfect knowledge of the laws of motion
classically speaking of course they're
not classical in real life okay that
aside David has just said accurate
prediction under quantum theory is made
Difficult by quite a different effect so
let's talk about that he goes on to say
quote the laws of quantum mechanics
require an object that is initially at a
given position in all universes to
spread out in the Multiverse sense for
instance a photon in its other Universe
counterparts all start from the same
point on a glowing filament but then
move in trillions of different
directions when we later make a
measurement of what has happened we too
become differentiated as each copy of us
sees what has happened in our particular
Universe if the object in question is
the Earth's atmosphere then a hurricane
may have occurred in 30 of universal say
and not in the remaining 70 subjectively
we perceive this as a single
unpredictable or random outcome though
from the Multiverse point of view all
the outcomes have actually happened
pausing there my reflection this is so
crucial to appreciate there is no
Randomness in quantum theory quantum
theory is not a theory of Randomness it
is a theory of objective determinism
everything is determined by the quantum
laws of physics across the Multiverse
but you do not occupy all the Multiverse
you occupy some of universes
subjectively speaking you don't know
which Universe you're in from moment to
moment let alone where you're going to
be in the future and so subjectively
things appear to be random subjectively
things appear to probably happen but
nothing probably happens things actually
are going to happen to you nothing is
random just because you can't predict
what's going to happen as David says
there
you've got these photons coming from the
filament they're all coming from the
same place in the filament but because
there is a range of possible places
where they can go then once they've left
the filament once they've left the
filament then you're going to have
different effects in different universes
but all of them obtain okay all of these
different possible trajectories of the
photon leaving the filament are going to
happen across the Multiverse and in some
of those you're going to have hurricanes
and in some you're not going to have
hurricanes and he said there 30 percent
of universes have a hurricane 70 down so
that's perfectly determined that's not
random there's nothing random about that
but you being in a universe where you
don't know and you cannot know you
cannot know what Universe you're in are
going to perceive things as random or at
least unpredictable random would be of
course
even given 30 and 70 that something else
entirely happens that would be true
Randomness right okay so you couldn't
even it wouldn't even obey those
proportions there would be be no law
whatsoever which is why by the way David
puts random in scare quotes there is no
random he's no random or the possible
physically possible outcomes by
physically possible we mean physically
possible as determined by the laws of
quantum theory David says quote this
parallel universe multiplicity is the
real reason for the unpredictability of
the weather our inability to measure the
initial conditions accurately is
completely irrelevant even if we knew
the initial conditions perfectly the
multiplicity and therefore the
unpredictability of the motion would
remain pausing their my reflection just
to emphasize that even if we could and
we can't but even if we could
determine precisely from where in other
words our X our position from where the
photons were coming
to perfect precision
that would not mean that we'll be able
to determine where any individual Photon
was going to go maybe it's determined
perfectly well that if you start at
point x then half of the time you go
left and half the time you go right so
that could be a situation which we're in
but it also the laws would also tell us
that you can't tell which proportion of
the universe you happen to be the
Multiverse you happen to be in are you
in the 50 of universes where it goes
less or are you in the 50 of the
universe is where it goes right you
don't know even though it's perfectly
determined and even though you have a
perfect understanding of where that
photon is being emitted from
so at that point it's not down the
unpredictability is not down to being
able to measure something or not it's
down to the fact that subjectively
speaking you occupy only part of the
Multiverse not the entire thing David
goes on to say and on the other hand in
contrast to the classical case an
imaginary Multiverse with only slightly
different initial conditions would not
behave very differently from the real
Multiverse it might suffer hurricanes in
30.00001 percent of its universes and
not in the remaining
69.999999 the flapping of butterflies
Wings does not in reality cause
hurricanes because the classical
phenomenon of chaos depends on perfect
determinism which does not hold in any
single Universe pausing their my
reflection
perfect determinism does not hold in any
single Universe any single Universe
perfect determinism holds in reality in
physical reality but physical reality is
the Multiverse but in any single
Universe approximately speaking the
single universe is emergent the
fundamental thing is the Multiverse it's
physical reality emerging from that are
these approximations that we can talk
about called single universes and these
approximations of being observers us
people inside of those single universes
approximately we actually know that they
are
uncountably infinite number of fungible
instances of ourselves in these
universes when you're in these single
universes you can't determine what's
going to happen from moment to moment in
your Universe you can't predict it
appears to be random and so that's why
we say perfect determinism does not hold
does not hold in any single Universe
let's get going David says quote
consider a group of identical universes
at an instant at which in all of them
are particular butterfly's Wings have
flapped up consider second group of
universes which at the same instance are
identical to the first group except that
in them the butterfly's wings are down
wait for a few hours quantum mechanics
predicts that unless there are
exceptional circumstances such as
someone watching the butterfly and
pressing a button to detonate a nuclear
bomb if it flaps its wings the two
groups of universes nearly identical at
first are still nearly identical but age
group within itself has become greatly
differentiated it includes universes
with hurricanes universes without
hurricanes and even a very tiny number
of universes in which the butterfly has
spontaneously changed its species
through an accidental arrangement of all
its atoms or the sun has exploded
because all its atoms Bounce by chance
towards the nuclear reaction at its core
even so the two groups still resemble
each other very closely in the universes
in which the butterfly raised its wings
and the Hurricanes occurred those
hurricanes were indeed unpredictable but
the butterfly was not causally
responsible
for there were near identical hurricanes
and universes where everything else was
the same but the wings were lowered it
is perhaps worth stressing the
distinction between unpredictability and
intractability
unpredictability has nothing to do with
the available computational resources
classical systems are unpredictable or
would be if they existed because of
their sensitivity to initial conditions
pausing the MRI reflection just to
remember so why is this unpredictability
there because of the initial conditions
the sensitivity National conditions
because you cannot measure the initial
conditions to infinite Precision which
is what you would need in order to
predict how the system is going to
evolve over time you need two things to
be able to predict how the system is
going to evolve over time perfect
understanding of the Law's emotion
presume you have those and they're
classical but also perfectly precise
accurate statements of the initial
conditions to the infinite number of
decimal places as to where the position
of that object is and its initial
velocity okay you need those two things
to perfect precision and if you're off
by any amount at all that degree by
which you're off is going to magnify
itself for every time T equals one t
equals two t equals three T equals four
it's just going to diverge from reality
over time and hence that is why
classical systems are unpredictable
because they're sensitive to the initial
conditions and if you think the object
is here but in fact it is fractions of a
millimeter to the left or to the right
then how you predict things are going to
evolve is going to be very different to
what they're going to evolve like in
reality okay
David goes onto the side quote Quantum
systems do not have that sensitivity
okay pausing it why not well because
there is no such thing as having
infinitely precise measurements of
physical quantities there there is a
smallest possible amount that you can
get down to but but it's going to be a
range of things it's as different this
is uh the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle comes in here you can't
measure things to infinite Precision in
classical Theory you can't anyway
because there's a limit to obviously you
know how precisely measuring device is
but here this has got nothing to do with
measuring devices here this has to do
with in reality the object itself is
spread out in space it really doesn't
occupy a single position in classical
physics it does it's there at a
particular point x but you can't measure
it to that perfectly precise point x
quantum theory says never mind trying to
measure it at a particular point x it's
spread out in space spread in time
spread in terms of energy and so on and
so forth so the object is spread out
it's like this is not to say by the way
it's not say that space itself is spread
out this is different okay the atom or
the the electron or whatever the
particle is that's in space it is spread
out in space okay that is a and it's
spread out in time as well this is a
very different kind of thing to saying
time itself has a limit to its Precision
or that space itself has a limit to its
Precision no again theories of space and
time the explanation of space and time
is general relativity not quantum theory
but where an object happens to be in
space and time does come down to our
understanding of how it is we observe
these things in reality and that is
quantum theory as David says quote
Quantum systems do not have that
sensitivity but are unpredictable
because they behave differently in
different universes and so appear random
in most universes in neither case will
any amount of computation lessen the
unpredictability intractability by
contrast is a computational resource
issue it refers to a situation where we
could readily make the prediction if
only we could perform the required
computation but we cannot do so because
the resources required are impractically
large in order to disentangle the
problems of unpredictability from those
of intractability in quantum mechanics
we have to consider Quantum systems that
are in principle predictable
quantum theory is often presented as
making only probabilistic predictions
for example in the perforated barrier
and screen type of interference
experiment described in Chapter 2 the
photon can be observed to arrive at
anywhere in the bright part of the
Shadow pattern but it is important to
understand that for many other
experiments quantum theory predicts a
single definite outcome in other words
it predicts that all universes will end
up with the same outcome even if the
universe is differed at intermediate
stages of the experiment and it predicts
what that outcome will be in such cases
we observe non-random interference
phenomena an interferometer can
demonstrate such phenomena this is an
optical instrument that consists mainly
of mirrors both conventional mirrors and
semi-silvered mirrors okay pausing in my
reflection now I have spent hours
uh explaining this on top cast in
previous episodes so
um I will read this section but I'm
going to gloss over it so I'll have some
remarks to say but I urge you if you
don't understand this or feel as if you
don't appreciate it as I'm going through
it to go to the Multiverse section of
the beginning of Infinity uh in
particular my videos here that I'll put
up on the screen where I deal with this
at some length at some length and try to
explain how this sort of thing really
works and in those videos I point to
several other resources as well not to
mention the great David Wallace who has
a wonderful exposition of this
particular experiment online on YouTube
so yeah well worth watching that and
it's worth trying to get your head
around this kind of experiment the mark
Zender interferometer as it's so-called
if you want to understand some of the
deep Mysteries behind quantum theory
anyway let's keep going David Wright's
quote if a photon strikes a
semi-silvered mirror then in half the
universes it bounces off just as it
would from a conventional mirror but in
the other half it passes through as if
nothing were there a single Photon
enters the interferometer at the top
left as shown in this figure
in all the universes in which the
experiment is done the photonics
counterparts are traveling towards the
interferometer along the same path these
universes are therefore identical but as
soon as the photon strikes a
semi-silvered mirror the initially
identical Universe has become
differentiated in half of them the
photon passes through and travels along
the top side of the interferometer in
the remaining universe as it bounces off
the mirror and travels down the left
side of the interferometer the versions
of the photon in these two groups of
universes then strike and bounce off the
ordinary mirrors at the top right and
bottom left respectively thus they end
up arriving simultaneously at the
semi-silvered mirror on the bottom right
and interfere with one another remember
that we have allowed only one Photon
into the apparatus and in each Universe
there is still only one Photon in there
in all universes that Photon has now
struck at the bottom right mirror in
half of them it is Struck from the left
and in the other half it has struck it
from above the versions of the photon in
these two groups of universes interfere
strongly the net effect depends on the
exact geometry of the situation but this
figure shows the case where in all
universes the photon ends up taking the
right wood pointing path through the
mirror and in no Universe it's a
transmitter to reflect downwards thus
all the universes are identical at the
end of the experiment just as they were
at the beginning they were
differentiated and interfered with one
another only for a minute fraction of a
second in between pausing the Mi
reflection so here we have the mystery
of the Multiverse or the explanation of
the Multiverse I really should say
if you're striking a semi-silvered
mirror on then in 50 of the universities
you go through 150 of the universes you
bounce off right but if you have this
situation here where you have a
semi-silvered mirror at the end and all
of the photons appear to come out in the
One Direction the only possible
explanation is that there's been
interference interference caused by the
photon traveling both paths the only
explanation is that there must have been
a single Photon which has now taken both
parts of the apparatus to interfere with
itself so that it comes out in just that
one direction rather than going in both
directions after all if that wasn't the
case then you should expect the thing to
50 of the time come to be transmitted
through and 50 of the time to be
bouncing off that second
semi-silvered mirror but that's not what
happens David's main point here is not
to present yet another argument for the
existence of the Multiverse although
that's what I've just done but rather to
say that sometimes in quantum theory you
can have perfectly predictable outcomes
of experiments here is one such here is
one such where we know that no matter
what Universe you're in you're always
going to see the photon go in this
particular direction always okay so
there's no probabilistic stuff going on
here at all okay you know that the
photon is coming out that direction
because that's what the laws of quantum
theory say is going to happen and we can
check it with experiment and in fact
that's what happens as David goes on to
say quote this remarkable non-random
interference phenomenon is just as
inescapable a piece of evidence for the
existence of the Multiverse as is the
phenomenon of Shadows for the outcome
that I have described is incompatible
with either of the two possible paths
that a particle in a single Universe
might have taken if we project a photon
rightwards along the lower arm of the
interferometer for instance it may pass
through the semi-silvered mirror like
the photon in the interference
experiment does but it may not sometimes
it is deflected downwards likewise a
photon projected downwards along the
right arm may be deflected rightwards as
in the interference experiment or it may
travel straight down thus whichever path
you set a single Photon on inside the
apparatus it will emerge randomly only
when interference occurs between the two
paths is the outcome predictable it
follows that what is present in the
apparatus just before the end of the
interference experiment cannot be a
single Photon on a single path it cannot
for instance be just a photon traveling
on the lower arm there must be something
else present preventing it from bouncing
downwards nor can there just be a single
Photon traveling on the right arm again
something else must be there preventing
it from traveling straight down as it
sometimes would if it were there by
itself just as with shadows we can
construct further experiments to show
that something else has all the
properties of a photon that travels
along the other path and interferes with
the single Photon we see but with
nothing else in our universe pausing the
Mi reflection yes and so this is why we
also say that these other
interpretations that exists
uh that try and get around explaining
this kind of thing by recourse to well
it's actually another Photon traveling
along there and instead saying things
like well there's a wave there's a pilot
wave that is transmitted out that wave
has all the complexity of the Multiverse
it has all the complexity of another
Photon interfering with the photon that
we have transmitted through the
apparatus and so
as long as you're postulating an entity
with all the complexity of physical
reality in order to explain the outcome
of the experiment then you're invoking
the Multiverse you're just saying that
reality consists of these other things
that we can't observe but which are
causally having an effect upon the
things we do observe you can't actually
directly observe the so-called wave or
Pilot wave or whatever you want to call
it
traveling through the apparatus we say
we can't directly observe the photons
traveling upon both arms but the most
parsimonious way of understanding what's
going on is there must be two things
traveling along the arms after all we
can observe one Photon going into the
apparatus we know what happens when it
hits a semi-silvered mirror 50 of the
time it goes through 50 of the time
bounces off but only if something goes
along both those arms can we actually
have interference so I want to just
presume that two photons are going along
those arms
why two photons because the universes
have differentiated themselves at that
point into photons along the top arm and
along the the down through the
transmitted arm and through the the
bouncing off arm David goes on to say
quote since there are only two different
kinds of universe in this experiment the
calculation of what will happen takes
only about twice as long as it would if
the particle obeyed to classical laws
say if we were Computing a path of a
billiard ball a factor of two will
hardly make such computations
intractable however we have already seen
that multiplicity of much larger degrees
is fairly easy to achieve in the shadow
experiments a single Photon passes
through the barrier in which there are
some small holes and then falls on a
screen suppose that there are a thousand
holes in the barrier There Are Places on
the screen where the photon canval does
fall in some universes and places where
it cannot fall to calculate whether a
particular point on the screen can or
cannot ever receive the photon we must
calculate the mutual interference of a
thousand parallel universe versions of
the
specifically we have to calculate 1 000
parts from the barrier to the given
point on the screen and then calculate
the effects of those photons on each
other so as to determine whether or not
they are all prevented from reaching
that point thus we must perform roughly
a thousand times as much computation as
we would if we were working out whether
a classical particle would strike the
specified point or not the complexity of
this sort of computation shows us that
there is a lot more happening in our
quantum mechanical environment than
literally meets the eye
and I have argued expressing Dr
Johnson's Criterion for reality in terms
of computational complexity that this
complexity is the core reason why it
does not make sense to deny the
existence of the rest of the Multiverse
pausing in my reflection right so you
want to predict where a particular
Photon ends up on the screen in this
interference experiment and you're just
firing one at the apparatus at a time
then you have to account for all the
possible paths it is taken if you're
predicting it if you're really trying to
predict where this individual photon is
going to go you have to invoke the
existence of all these other entities
computationally speaking you're required
to postulate the real existence of these
other things
so that's the computational argument for
the existence of the Multiverse the only
way of predicting what's going on is to
postulate the existence of things you
can't observe more than meets the eye
which really must be there but they're
not going to enter your eye okay that's
David goes on to say quote but far
higher multiplicities are possible when
there are two or more interacting
particles involved in an interference
phenomenon suppose that each of the two
interacting particles has say a thousand
paths open to it the pair can then be in
a million different states an
intermediate stage of the experiment so
there can be up to a million universes
that differ in what this pair of
particles is doing if three particles
were interacting the number of different
universes could be a billion for four a
trillion and so on
thus the number of different histories
that we have to calculate if we want to
predict what will happen in such cases
increases exponentially with the number
of interacting particles
that is why the task of computing how a
typical Quantum system will behave is
well and truly intractable
end quote
worth repeating
you've got two particles they're
interacting there could be a thousand
paths open to these two interacting
particles David says
then that means that if you're trying to
predict what's going to happen at some
point in the future
then you're going to have to consider a
million different states
in the future to predict where it's
going to end up that's just for a pair
of particles with a thousand different
paths open to this pair of particles
that are interacting
but if you've got three particles now
similarly
it could be a billion different
universes for four a trillion this is
what we mean by intractable
the quantum system's behavior is well
and truly intractable because for every
particle you add you're multiplying the
number of outcomes by a thousand by a
thousand that's pretty intractable
difficult to compute the computational
resources are spiraling out of control
David says quote this is the
intractability that was exercising
Feynman we see that it has nothing to do
with unpredictability on the contrary it
is most clearly manifested in quantum
mechanical phenomena that are highly
predictable that is because in such
phenomena the same definite outcome
occurs in all universes but that outcome
is the result of interference between
vast numbers of universes that were
different during the experiment all this
is in principle predictable from quantum
theory and is not overly sensitive to
the initial conditions what makes it
hard to predict that in such experiments
the outcome will always be the same is
that doing so requires inordinately
large amounts of computation
intractability is in principle a greater
element universality then
unpredictability ever could be I have
already said that a perfectly accurate
rendering of a roulette wheel need not
indeed should not give the same sequence
of numbers as the real one similarly we
cannot prepare in advance a virtual
reality rendering of tomorrow's weather
but we can or shall one day be able to
make a rendering of weather which though
not the same as the real weather
conditions prevailing on any historical
day is nevertheless so realistic in its
behavior that no user however expert
will be able to distinguish it from
genuine weather the same is true of any
environment that does not show the
effects of quantum interference which
means most environments rendering such
an environment in virtual reality is a
tractable computational task however it
would appear that no practical rendering
is possible for environments that do
show the effects of quantum interference
without performing the exponentially
large amounts of computation how can we
be sure that in those cases our rendered
environment will not do things which the
Real Environment strictly never does
because of some interference phenomenon
it might seem natural to conclude that
reality does not after all display
genuine computational universality
because interference phenomena cannot be
usefully rendered Feynman however
correctly drew the opposite conclusion
instead of regarding the intractability
of the task of rendering Quantum
phenomena as an obstacle Feynman
regarded as an opportunity if it
requires so much computation to work out
what will happen in an interference
experiment then the very Act of setting
up such an experiment and measuring its
outcome is tantamount to performing a
complex computation thus Feynman
reasoned it might after all be possible
to render Quantum environments
efficiently provided the computer were
allowed to perform experiments on a real
quantum mechanical object the computer
would choose what measurements to make
on an auxiliary piece of quantum
Hardware as it went along and would
incorporate the results of the
measurements into its computations the
auxiliary Quantum Hardware would in
effect be a computer too for example an
interferometer could act as such a
device and like any other physical
object it can be thought of as a
computer we would nowadays call it a
special purpose quantum computer we
program it by setting up the mirrors in
a certain geometry and then projecting a
single Photon at the first mirror in a
non-random interference experiment the
photon will always emerge in one
particular direction determined by the
settings of the mirrors and we can
interpret that direction as indicating
the result of the computation in a more
complex experiment with several
interacting particles such a computation
could easily as I have explained become
intractable yet since we could readily
obtain its result just by performing
this experiment it is not really
intractable after all we must now be
more careful with our terminology
evidently there are computational tasks
that are intractable if we attempt to
perform them using any existing computer
but which would be tractable if we were
to use quantum mechanical objects as
special purpose computers notice that
the fact that quantum mechanical
phenomena can be used to perform
computations in this way depends on
their not being subject to chaos if the
outcome of computations were an
inordinately sensitive function of the
initial State programming the device by
setting it in a suitable initial state
would be an impossibly difficult task
using a Quantum auxiliary device in this
way might be considered cheating since
any environment is obviously much easier
to render if one has access to a spare
copy of it to measure during the
rendering however firemen conjectured
that it would not be necessary to use a
literal copy of the environment being
rendered that it would be possible to
find a much more easily constructed
auxiliary device whose interference
properties were nevertheless analogous
to those of the target environment then
a normal computer could do the rest of
the rendering working through the
analogy between the auxiliary device and
the target environment and fireman
expected that would be a tractable task
furthermore he conjectured correctly as
it turned out that all the quantum
mechanical properties of any Target
environment could be simulated by
auxiliary devices of a particular type
that he specified namely an array of
spinning atoms each interacting with its
neighbors he called the whole class of
such devices a universal Quantum
simulator but it was not a single
machine as it would have to be in order
to qualify as a universal computer the
interactions that the simulators atoms
would have to undergo could not be fixed
once and for all as in a universal
computer but would have to be
re-engineered for the simulation of each
Target environment but the point of
universality is that it should be
possible to program a single machine
specified once and for all to perform
any possible computation or render any
physically possible environment in 1985
I proved that under quantum physics
there is a universal quantum computer
the proof was fairly straightforward all
I had to do was mimic during's
constructions but using quantum theory
to define the underlying physics instead
of the classical mechanics that Turing
had implicitly assumed a universal
quantum computer could perform any
computation but any other quantum
computer or any Turing type computer
could perform and it could render any
physically possible environment in
virtual reality moreover it has since
been shown that the time and other
resources that it would need to do these
things would not increase exponentially
with the size or detail of the
environment being rendered so that the
relevant computations would be tractable
by the standards of complexity Theory
pausing their my reflection and that's
where we'll end the readings for today
it's a nice place to end where David
Deutsch has mentioned his own
contribution to the field of quantum
computation proving that there is such a
thing as the universal quantum computer
in 1985 and this is why many of us give
him the credit for laying the
foundations for the entire field and
really setting the scene for the
industry that is the multi-billion
dollar multinational search for these
Universal quantum computers we don't
have them yet but they're coming they're
coming anyone's saying they're not
coming you have to stay pessimist in the
literal sense saying that some problem
isn't soluble for no good reason because
we know the laws of physics permit these
things so it's just a matter of knowing
how fixing the engineering and I like
how David says
proof of Genius I suppose where he says
he the proof was fairly straightforward
someone like him
someone creative enough I suppose
um yes but of course go into his website
where that seminal paper is there that
is a an important historic document
that paper which I'll put up on the
screen here laying the foundations as I
say for Quantum computation the entire
field
and this this computer this is this
device that as David says there can do
the work of any other computer Quantum
or classical but importantly can do the
work of any of those devices efficiently
okay it's able to do do
many tasks that would take a classical
computer
longer than the age of the universe okay
it would be intractable for a classical
computer it makes these things trackable
it can do some of these things like
simulating Quantum systems
um factorizing numbers are cracking
codes which is what we'll get into next
time actually we'll talk a little bit
about RSA we'll talk about Shaw's
algorithm and talk about some of the
Practical applications of these quantum
computers but until then bye-bye
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign
[Music]